4.1 Introduction
Having studied functions of complex numbers, we now turn to the calculus of such
functions.
To know the graph of an ordinary real function is to know the function com-
pletely, and so to understand curves is to understand real functions. The key insight
of differential calculus is that if we take a common or garden curve, place it under a
microscope and examine it using lenses of greater and greater magnifying power,
each little piece looks like a straight line. When produced, these infinitesimal pieces
of straight line are the tangents to the curve, and their directions describe the local
behaviour of the curve. Thinking of the curve as the graph of f(x), these directions
are in turn described by the derivative, f′(x).
Despite the fact that we cannot draw the graph of a complex function, in this
chapter we shall see how it is still possible to describe the local behaviour of a
complex mapping by means of a complex analogue of the ordinary derivative—the
“amplitwist”.
4.2 A Puzzling Phenomenon
Throughout Chapter 2 we witnessed a very strange phenomenon. Whenever we
generalized a familiar real function to a corresponding complex function, the map-
ping sent infinitesimal squares to infinitesimal squares. At present this is a purely
empirical observation based on using a computer to draw pictures of the map-
pings. In this chapter we begin to explore the theoretical underpinnings of the
phenomenon.
Let’s go back and take a closer look at a simple mapping like zÞÑ w= z2. As we
already know, this maps the origin-centred circle |z|= rinto the circle |w|= r2, and
it maps the ray arg(z) = θinto the ray arg(w) = 2θ. An obvious consequence of this
Visual Complex Analysis. 25th Anniversary Edition. Tristan Needham, Oxford University Press.
© Tristan Needham (2023). DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780192868916.003.0004
214 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
[4.1] The tip of the iceberg: small squares map to small squares—but why? Clearly the
mapping z ÞÑ z2 preserves the orthogonality of origin-centred rays and circles. So the
small, ultimately vanishing “squares” on the left must be mapped to small, ultimately van-
ishing rectangles on the right. Very surprisingly, though, squares are ultimately mapped to
squares! As we shall see, this is a consequence of the fact that the mapping is conformal.
is that the right angle of intersection between such circles and rays in the z-plane
is preserved by the mapping, which is to say that their images in the w-plane also
meet at right angles. As illustrated in [4.1], a grid of infinitesimal squares formed
from such circles and rays must therefore be mapped to an image grid composed of
infinitesimal rectangles. However, this does not explain why these image rectangles
must again be squares.
As we will explain shortly, the fact that infinitesimal squares are preserved is
just one consequence of the fact that z ÞÑ w = z2 is conformal everywhere except
at the two critical points z = 0 and z = ∞, where angles are doubled. In par-
ticular, any pair of orthogonal curves is mapped to another pair of orthogonal
curves. In order to give another example of this, we first dismember our map-
ping into its real and imaginary parts. Writing z = x+ iyand w = u+ iv, we
obtain
u+ iv= w= z2 = (x+ iy)2 = (x2
− y2) + i2xy.
Thus the new coordinates are given in terms of the old ones by
u = x2
− y2
,
(4.1)
v = 2xy.
We now forget (temporarily!) that we are in C, and think of (4.1) as simply rep-
resenting a mapping of R2 to R2. If we let our point (x, y) slide along any of the
rectangular hyperbolas with equation 2xy= const., then we see from (4.1) that its
A Puzzling Phenomenon 215
[4.2] Again, small squares map to small squares—but why? The pre-images of the hori-
zontal and vertical lines on the right are the two families of hyperbolas on the left, which a
computation confirms are orthogonal to each other, as illustrated. Thus the squares on the
right must have pre-images that are rectangles on the left. But, once again, surprisingly,
the pre-images of the squares are actually squares!
image (u, v) will move on a horizontal line v= const. Likewise, the preimages of
the vertical lines u= const. will be another family of rectangular hyperbolas with
equations (x2
− y2) = const. Since their images are orthogonal, the claimed con-
formality of zÞÑ z2 implies that these two kinds of hyperbolas should themselves
be orthogonal.
Figure [4.2] makes it clear that they are indeed orthogonal. We may verify
this mathematically by recalling that two curves are orthogonal at a point of
intersection if the product of their slopes at that point is equal to−1. Implicitly
differentiating the equations of the hyperbolas, we find that
x2
− y2
= const. ⇒ x− yy′
= 0 ⇒ y′ = +(x/y),
2xy= const. ⇒ y+ xy′
= 0 ⇒ y′ = −(y/x).
Thus the product of the slopes of the two kinds of hyperbola at a point of
intersection is−1, as was to be shown.
Clearly we could carry on in this way, analysing the effect of the mapping on
one pair of curves after another, but what is really needed is a general argument
showing that if two curves meet at some arbitrary angle ϕ, then their images under
(4.1) will also meet at angle ϕ. To obtain such an argument, we shall continue to
pretend that we are living in the less rich structure of R2 (rather than our own
home C) and investigate the local properties of a general mapping of the plane to
itself.
216 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
4.3 Local Description of Mappings in the Plane
4.3.1 Introduction
Referring to [4.3], it’s clear that to find out whether any given mapping is confor-
mal or not will require only a local investigation of what is happening very near
to the intersection point q. To make this clearer still, recognize that if we wish to
measure ϕ, or indeed even define it, we need to draw the tangents [dotted] to both
curves and then measure the angle between them. We could draw a very good
approximation to one of these tangents simply by joining qto any nearby point p
on the curve. Of course the nearer p is to q, the better will the chord qpapprox-
imate the actual tangent. Since we are only concerned here with directions and
angles (rather than positions) we may dispense with the tangent itself, and instead
use the infinitesimal vector qpthat points along it. Likewise, after we have per-
formed the mapping, we are not interested in the positions of the image points
Qand Pthemselves; rather, we want the infinitesimal connecting vector QPthat
describes the direction of the new tangent at Q. We will call this infinitesimal vector
QPthe image of the vector qp. However natural this terminology may seem, note
that this really is a new sense of the word “image”.
Let us now summarize our strategy. Given formulae such as (4.1), which describe
the mapping of the points to their image points, we wish to discover the induced
mapping of infinitesimal vectors emanating from a point qto their image vectors
emanating from the image point Q. In principle, we could then apply the latter
mapping to qpand to qs, yielding their images QPand QS, and hence the angle
of intersection of the image curves through Q.
[4.3] Conformal mappings. The angle ϕbetween the curves passing through qon the
left is defined to be the angle between their tangents there. But as pand smerge with q,
this angle ϕ ≍ ∠pqs. Let the images of p, q, sbe P, Q, S, respectively. Then to prove
conformality, we need to show that ∠PQS ≍ ϕ ≍ ∠pqs. To do so, we need to show that
the transformation that carries the initial connecting vectors on the left to their “images” on
the right (ultimately) does not alter the angle between them. This (linear) transformation
is called the Jacobian, and its coordinate description in the case of a general mapping is
derived via the next figure.
Local Description of Mappings in the Plane 217
4.3.2 The Jacobian Matrix
Consider [4.4]. As discussed, the direction of the illustrated curve through q is
being described with an infinitesimal vector dx
dy ; the infinitesimal image vec-
tor du
dv gives the direction of the image curve through Q. We can determine the
component duof du
dv as follows:
du= total change in udue to moving along dx
dy
= (change in uproduced by moving dxin the x-direction)
+
(change in uproduced by moving dyin the y-direction)
= (rate of change of uwith x)· (change dxin x)
+
(rate of change of uwith y)· (change dyin y)
= (Bxu) dx + (Byu) dy,
where Bx = B/Bxetc. Likewise, we find that the vertical component is given by the
formula
dv= (Bxv) dx + (Byv) dy.
Since these expressions are linear in dxand dy, it follows (assuming that not all the
partial derivatives vanish) that the infinitesimal vectors are carried to their images
by a linear transformation. The general significance of this will be discussed later,
but for the moment it means that the local effect of our mapping is completely
described by a matrix Jcalled the Jacobian. Thus,
[4.4] The local linear (Jacobian) transformation induced by a general mapping. An
infinitesimal vector along a curve is carried to its image along the image curve by a linear
transformation called the Jacobian, J. As the text explains, du= (Bxu) dx + (Byu) dy,
and similarly for dv, leading to the matrix representation of Jas (4.2).
218 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
dx
dy Þ− Ñ
du
dv= J dx
dy,
where the Jacobian matrix is
J=
Bxu Byu
Bxv Byv. (4.2)
We are now in a position to return to the specific mapping z ÞÑ z2, or more
precisely to the mapping of R2 that we extracted from it. If we evaluate (4.2) for the
mapping (4.1), we find that
J=
2x−2y
2y 2x.
The geometric effect of this matrix is perhaps more clearly seen if we switch to
polar coordinates. At the point z = reiθ—or rather (rcos θ, rsin θ), since for the
moment we are still in R2—we have
J= 2r
cos θ− sin θ
sin θ cos θ.
The effect of the 2ris merely to expand all the vectors by this factor. This clearly
does not affect the angle between any two of them. The remaining matrix is
probably familiar to you as producing a rotation of θ, and hence it too does
not alter the angle between vectors. Since both stages of the transformation pre-
serve angles, we have in fact verified the previous claim: the net transformation is
conformal.
4.3.3 The Amplitwist Concept
We have just seen that the local effect of zÞÑ z2 on infinitesimal vectors is to expand
them and to rotate them. Transformations of this type (i.e., whose local effect is
produced in these two steps) will play a dominating role from now on, and it will
be very much to our advantage to have vivid new words specifically to describe
them.
If all the infinitesimal vectors (qpetc.) emanating from qmerely undergo an
equal enlargement to produce their images at Q, then we shall say that the local
effect of the mapping is to amplify the vectors, and that the magnification factor
involved is the amplification of the mapping at the point q. If, on the other hand,
they all undergo an equal rotation, then we shall say that the local effect of the
mapping is to twist the vectors, and that the angle of rotation involved is the twist
of the mapping at the point q. More generally, the kind of mapping that will con-
cern us will locally both amplify and twist infinitesimal vectors—we say that such
a transformation is locally an amplitwist. Thus “an amplitwist” is synonymous
Local Description of Mappings in the Plane 219
with “a (direct) similarity”, except that the former refers to the transformation of
infinitesimal vectors, whereas “a similarity” has no such connotation.
[We remind the reader of the discussion in both Prefaces: “infinitesimal” is
being used here in a definite, technical sense—small and ultimately vanishing,
the relationship to other infinitesimals being expressed via Newtonian “ultimate
equalities”.]
We can illustrate the new terminology with reference to the concrete case we
have just analysed: The mapping zÞÑ z2 is locally an amplitwist with amplification
2rand twist θ. See [4.5]. Quite generally, this figure makes it clear that if a mapping
is locally an amplitwist then it is automatically conformal—the angle ϕbetween the
infinitesimal complex numbers is preserved.
Returning to [4.1] and [4.2], we now understand why infinitesimal squares were
mapped to infinitesimal squares. Indeed, an infinitesimal region of arbitrary shape
located at zwill be “amplitwisted” (amplified and twisted) to a similar shape at
z2. Note that here we are extending our terminology still further: henceforth we
will freely employ the verb “to amplitwist”, meaning to amplify and to twist an
infinitesimal geometric object.
All we really have at the moment is one simple mapping that turned out to be
locally an amplitwist. In order to appreciate how truly fundamental this amplitwist
concept is, we must return to C and begin from scratch to develop the idea of
complex differentiation.
[4.5] Amplitwist terminology. The local effect of zÞÑ z2 on infinitesimal complex num-
bers emanating from z= reiθ is to amplitwist them. Specifically, here we must amplify
them by 2r—this magnification factor is called the amplification—and we must twist
them by θ—this rotation angle is called the twist. The net transformation is called the
amplitwist: it is equivalent to multiplication by (amplification) ei(twist) = 2reiθ, in this
example. If a complex mapping is locally an amplitwist, as this one is, then it is also con-
formal, as illustrated. We reserve this terminology for infinitesimal complex numbers, i.e.,
for small complex numbers in their moment of vanishing.
220 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
4.4 The Complex Derivative as Amplitwist
4.4.1 The Real Derivative Re-examined
In the ordinary real calculus we have a potent means of visualizing the derivative
f′ of a function ffrom R to R, namely, as the slope of the graph y= f(x). See [4.6a].
Unfortunately, due to our lack of four-dimensional imagination, we can’t draw
the graph of a complex function, and hence we cannot generalize this particular
conception of the derivative in any obvious way.
As a first step towards a successful generalization, we simply split the axes apart,
so that [4.6a] becomes [4.6b]. Note that we have drawn both copies of R in a hori-
zontal position, in anticipation of their being viewed as merely the real axes of two
complex planes.
Next, continuing in the spirit of the previous section, we observe that |f′(x)|
describes how much the initial infinitesimal vector at xmust be expanded to obtain
its image at f(x). More algebraically, f′(x) is that real number by which we must
multiply the initial vector to obtain its image:
f′(x)· Ñ = − Ñ. (4.3)
If f′(x) > 0 (as in [4.6b]) then the image of positive dxis a positive df, but if
f′(x) <0 then the infinitesimal image vector dfis negative and points to the left,
as illustrated in [4.7]. In this case, dfcan be obtained by first expanding dxby
|f′(x)|, then rotating it by π. If we think of f′(x) as a point on the real axis of C,
then arg[f′(x)] = 0 when f′(x) > 0, and arg[f′(x)] = πwhen f′(x) < 0. Thus,
[4.6] The real derivative re-examined. [a] The traditional picture of the derivative f′ as the
slope of the tangent to the graph y= f(x). [b] Let us instead break apart the two copies of
the real axis, as we are forced to break apart the two copies of C in the case of a complex
function, zÞÑ f(z). Then an infinitesimal movement dxis mapped to df= f′dx: in other
words, the local transformation is an amplification by f′
.
The Complex Derivative as Amplitwist 221
[4.7] If we think of f′(x) as a point on the real axis of C, then arg[f′(x)] = 0 when
f′(x) > 0, and arg[f′(x)] = π when f′(x) < 0. Thus, regardless of whether f′(x) is
positive or negative, we see that the local effect of fon an infinitesimal vector dxat xis
to expand it by |f′(x)| and to rotate it by arg[f′(x)].
regardless of whether f′(x) is positive or negative, we see that the local effect of
fon an infinitesimal vector dxat xis to expand it by |f′(x)| and to rotate it by
arg[f′(x)].
With all this fresh in our minds, we now attempt to generalize the notion of
“derivative” to mappings of C.
4.4.2 The Complex Derivative
Consider the effect of a complex mapping f(z) on an infinitesimal complex number
emanating from z. Its image (i.e., the connecting complex number between the two
image points) will be an infinitesimal complex number emanating from f(z). The
generalization of [4.6b] or [4.7] is now [4.8]. On the right, we have drawn this image
complex number in black, and we have also drawn a copy [white] at f(z) of the
original arrow at z. To transform the white arrow into the black image arrow now
requires not only an expansion, but also a rotation. In figure [4.8] it looks as though
we must expand the white arrow by 2, and rotate it by (3π/4). Contrast this with
the case of a real function, where the required rotation angle could only be 0 or π;
in the case of a complex function we need rotations through arbitrary angles.
[4.8] The local effect of a general complex mapping. The effect of a complex function on
an infinitesimal arrow is to rotate it and expand it, which is equivalent to multiplication
by a complex number = (expansion factor)ei(rotation angle) = 2 ei(3π/4), in the illustrated
example.
222 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
Nevertheless, we can still write down an algebraic equation completely analo-
gous to (4.3), because “expand and rotate” is precisely what multiplication by a complex
number means. Thus the complex derivative f′(z) can now be introduced as that
complex number by which we must multiply the infinitesimal number at zto obtain
its image at f(z):
f′(z)·
Ñ
= Õ. (4.4)
In order to produce the correct effect, the length of f′(z) must be the magnification
factor, and the argument of f′(z) must be the angle of rotation. For example, at the par-
ticular point shown in [4.8] we would have f′(z) = 2 ei(3π/4). In fact, in the spirit
of Chapter 1, we need not even distinguish between the local transformation and
the complex number that represents it.
To find f′(z) we have looked at the image of a specific arrow at z, but (unlike the
case of R) there are now infinitely many possible directions for such arrows. What
if we had looked at an arrow in a different direction from the illustrated one?
We are immediately in trouble, because a typical mapping1 will do what you
see in [4.9]. Clearly the magnification factor differs for the various arrows, and
likewise each arrow needs to be rotated a different amount to obtain its image.
While we could still use a complex number in (4.4) to describe the transformation
of the arrows, it would have to be a different number for each arrow. There would
therefore be no single complex number we could assign to this point as being the
derivative of fat z. We have arrived at an apparently gloomy impasse: a typical
mapping of C simply cannot be differentiated.
[4.9] Infinitesimal complex numbers in different directions are generally rotated and
expanded by different amounts. In general, a complex function will map an infinitesi-
mal circle to an infinitesimal ellipse, as shown. But this means that infinitesimal radii in
different directions each undergo different rotations and expansions. The mapping is not
locally an amplitwist, and is therefore not “analytic”: f′(z) does not exist.
1 Shortly we will justify certain details of [4.9], such as the fact that an infinitesimal circle is mapped
to an infinitesimal ellipse.
The Complex Derivative as Amplitwist 223
4.4.3 Analytic Functions
We get around the above obstacle in Zen-like fashion—by ignoring it! That is, from
now on we concentrate almost exclusively on those very special mappings that
can be differentiated. Such functions are called analytic (or holomorphic). From the
previous discussion it follows that
Analytic mappings are precisely those whose local effect is an amplitwist: all the
infinitesimal complex numbers emanating from a single point are amplified and
twisted the same amount.
In contrast to [4.9], the effect of an analytic mapping can be seen in [4.10]. For such
a mapping the derivative exists, and simply is the amplitwist, or, if you prefer, the
complex number representing the amplitwist.
At this point you might quite reasonably fear that however interesting such map-
pings might be, they would be too exotic to include any familiar or useful functions.
However, a ray of hope is held out by the humble-looking mapping zÞÑ z2, for we
have already established that it is locally an amplitwist, as illustrated in [4.5], and
so it now gains admittance into the select set of analytic functions. In fact, quite
amazingly, we will discover in the next chapter that virtually every function we
have met in this book is analytic! Of course we have already seen plenty of empir-
ical evidence of this in our many pictures showing small “squares” being mapped
to small “squares”.
It should perhaps be stressed that all our recent pictures have been concerned
with local properties, and hence with infinitesimal arrows and figures. For example,
it’s clear from [4.10] that any analytic mapping will send infinitesimal circles
to other infinitesimal circles; however, this does not mean that such mappings
typically send circles to circles. Figure [4.11] (which contains [4.10] at its centre)
illustrates the fact that if we start with an infinitesimal circle and then expand it,
its image will generally distort out of all semblance of circularity. Of course, an
important exception to this is provided by the Möbius transformations, for these
[4.10] Analytic = locally an amplitwist, expanding and rotating all infinitesimal complex
numbers equally. By definition, an analytic mapping is locally an amplitwist, and the
derivative f′(z) simply is the amplitwist.
224 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
[4.11] Analytic mappings only send infinitesimal circles to circles. While an analytic
mapping must send infinitesimal circles to circles, it will generally deform an expanding
circle into a shape that becomes less and less circular. The only analytic mappings that
preserve circles of all sizes are the Möbius transformations.
precisely do preserve circles of all sizes. In fact it can be shown that the Möbius
transformations are the only2 ones with this property.
4.4.4 A Brief Summary
The principal kinds of mapping we wish to study in this book are the analytic
(complex-differentiable) ones. Although these will turn out to include almost all
the useful functions, they are nevertheless very special. Their effect on an infinites-
imal disc centred at zis, after translation to f(z), simply to amplify and twist it.
The amplification is the expansion factor, and the twist is the angle of rotation. The
local effect of fis then completely encoded in the single complex number f′(z), the
derivative of f, or (as we will often prefer to call it) the amplitwist of f:
f′(z) = the derivative of fat z
= the amplitwist of fat z
= (amplification) ei(twist)
= |f′(z)| eiarg [f′(z)]
.
To obtain the image at f(z) of an infinitesimal complex number at z, you just
multiply it by f′(z).
Two last points. We have introduced the word “amplitwist” (in addition to
“derivative”) because it is suggestive, and because it will make later reasoning
2 This was proved by Carathéodory (1937).
Some Simple Examples 225
much easier to explain. However, the student meeting this subject for the first time
should be made aware of the fact that in all other books only the word deriva-
tive is used. Also, note that the two words are synonymous only to the extent
(cf. Chapter 1) that a complex number can be identified with the similarity trans-
formation it produces when each point is multiplied by it. Thus, for example,
“to differentiate” will not mean the same as “to amplitwist”: the former refers to
the act of finding the derivative of a function, while the latter refers to the act of
“amplifying and twisting” an infinitesimal geometric figure.
4.5 Some Simple Examples
In the following examples we have superimposed the image copy of C on the
original one.
z ÞÑ z+ c.
This represents a translation of the points by c. As we see in [4.12a], the length
of complex numbers emanating from zis preserved, and hence the amplification is
unity. Equally clearly, since no rotation is induced, the twist is zero. Hence
(z+ c)′
= amplitwist of (z+ c) = 1 ei0
= 1.
Notice how this is in complete accord with the familiar rule of real calculus, namely,
that d
dx(x+ c) = 1.
z ÞÑ Az.
If A= aeiα, then this represents the combination of an origin-centred expansion
by a, and a rotation by α. It is clear in [4.12b] that any arrow at z(in particular an
infinitesimal one) will suffer precisely the same amplification and twist as do the
points of the plane themselves. Hence
(Az)′
= amplitwist of (Az) = A.
While the meaning is richer, this is once again formally identical to the familiar
result d
dx(Ax) = A.
zÞÑ z2
.
Our earlier investigation revealed that at the point z = reiθ this mapping is
locally an amplitwist with amplification 2rand twist θ, as illustrated in [4.5]. Hence,
(z2)′
= amplitwist of (z2) = (amplification) ei(twist) = 2reiθ
= 2z.
Once again, note that this result is formally identical to the formula (x2)′
= 2x
of ordinary calculus. In the next chapter we shall obtain a directly complex and
geometrical demonstration of this fact.
226 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
[4.12] The complex amplitwist formula agrees with the real derivative. [a] The transla-
tion zÞÑ z+ chas amplification 1 and twist 0, so its amplitwist is 1, in accordance with
the real formula, (x+ c)′
= 1. [b] The mapping zÞÑ Az= aeiαzhas amplification aand
twist α, so its amplitwist is aeiα = A, in accordance with the real formula, (Ax)′
= A.
[4.13] Conjugation is anticonformal and therefore not analytic. The mapping zÞÑ zis
anticonformal, so it is not locally an amplitwist, and the derivative does not exist.
z ÞÑ z.
Since this mapping is anticonformal, it clearly cannot be analytic, for we have
already observed that if a mapping is locally an amplitwist, then it is automati-
cally conformal. Figure [4.13a] pinpoints the trouble. From the picture we see that
the image at zof any complex number emanating from zhas the same length as
the original, and hence the amplification is unity. The problem lies in the fact that
an arrow at angle ϕmust be rotated by−2ϕto obtain its image arrow at angle−ϕ.
Thus different arrows must be rotated different amounts (which is not a twist) and
hence there is no amplitwist.
Conformal = Analytic 227
4.6 Conformal = Analytic
4.6.1 Introduction
In [4.5] we saw clearly that any mapping that is locally an amplitwist is also auto-
matically conformal. In terms of complex differentiation, we can now rephrase
this by saying that all analytic functions are conformal. The question then nat-
urally arises as to whether the converse might also be true. Is every confor-
mal mapping analytic, or, in other words, is the local effect of every conformal
mapping nothing more complicated than an amplitwist? If this were the case
then the two concepts would be equivalent and we would have a new way
of recognizing, and perhaps reasoning about, analytic functions. A tempting
prospect!
To dismiss this as a possibility would only require the discovery of a single
function that is conformal and yet whose local effect is not an amplitwist. The
example of complex conjugation, illustrated in [4.13b], shows how important it is
that we take into account the fact that the mapping preserves not only the mag-
nitude of angles, but also their sense. For zÞÑ zis not analytic, but it is also not a
counterexample to the conjecture, because it is anticonformal.
We have seen that although conjugation does possess an amplification, it fails to
be analytic because it doesn’t have a twist. Let us now consider instead a function
that does possess a twist, but which again fails to be analytic, this time by virtue of
not having an amplification. The effect of such a mapping at a particular point is
illustrated in [4.14]. The three curves on the LHS intersect at equal angles of (π/3),
and on the RHS their images do too. But the picture clearly shows that we are not
dealing with an amplitwist. Imagine that the infinitesimal tangent complex num-
bers to the curves are first twisted, but then rather than being amplified, as they
would be by an analytic function, they are expanded by different factors. Despite
[4.14] A twist without an amplitwist. At a single point it is possible for a mapping to
possess a twist, and therefore to be conformal at that point, and yet not possess an
amplification, and therefore not be an amplitwist.
228 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
this, however, the initial twist ensures that the angle between two curves is pre-
served both in magnitude and sense: the mapping is genuinely conformal at this
point.
4.6.2 Conformality Throughout a Region
If we only insist on conformality at isolated points then such counterexamples do
indeed exist (we’ve drawn one!), but if we require the mapping to be conformal
throughout a region then this nonanalytic behaviour cannot occur.
Imagine that we have a region throughout which the mapping is (i) conformal,
and (ii) sufficiently non-pathological that an infinitesimal line-segment is mapped
to another infinitesimal line-segment. In fact, re-examination of [4.3] reveals that
(ii) must be presupposed in order for (i) even to make sense. For if the infinitesimal
straight piece of curve from qto pdid not map to another of the same kind at
Q, then we could not even speak of an angle of intersection at Q, let alone of its
possible equality with ϕ.
Now look at [4.15]. In our conformal region we have drawn a large (i.e., not
infinitesimal) triangle abc, along with its image ABC. Notice that while the straight
edges of abcare completely distorted to produce the curvilinear edges of ABC,
the angles of this “triangular” image are identical with those of the original. Now
imagine shrinking abcdown towards an arbitrary point in the region. As we do so,
the sides of its shrinking image will increasingly resemble straight lines [by virtue
[4.15] A mapping that is conformal throughout a region must locally be an amplitwist. If
the mapping is conformal through the region in which the triangle abcshrinks to a point,
then its curvilinear triangular image ABC must ultimately become a similar infinitesi-
mal triangle, which can therefore be obtained by amplitwisting the original infinitesimal
triangle.
Conformal = Analytic 229
of (ii)], and all the while the angles will remain the same as the original’s. Thus,
any infinitesimal triangle in this region is mapped to another infinitesimal similar
triangle. Since the image triangle merely has a different size and alignment on the
page, it is indeed obtained by amplitwisting the original.
We have thus established the sought-after equivalence of conformal and analytic
mappings:
A mapping is locally an amplitwist at a point pif it is conformal throughout
an infinitesimal neighbourhood of p.
For this reason, the conventional definition of fbeing “analytic” at pis that f′ exist
at pand at all points in an infinitesimal neighbourhood of p.
From this result we can immediately deduce, for example, that complex inver-
sion z ÞÑ (1/z) is analytic, for we have already demonstrated geometrically that
it is conformal. By the same token, it follows more generally that all Möbius
transformations are analytic.
For no extra charge, we can obtain a further equivalence simply by concentrating
on distances rather than angles. What we have just seen is that a mapping can-
not possess a twist throughout a region without also having an amplification. In
order to investigate the converse, suppose that a mapping is only known to possess
an amplification throughout a region. Re-examine [4.15] from this point of view.
Unlike the previous case, there is no longer any a priori reason for the image ABC
to betray any features common to the original. However, as we carry out the same
shrinking process as before, the local existence of amplifications begins to reveal
itself.
As the triangle becomes very small, we may consider two of its sides, for
example ab and ac, to be infinitesimal arrows emanating from a vertex. While
we may not yet know anything of angles, we do know that these arrows both
undergo the same amplification to produce their images ABand AC. But if we
now apply this reasoning at one of the other vertices, we immediately find that
in order to be consistent, all three sides must undergo the same3 amplification.
Once again we have been able to deduce that the image triangle is similar to the
original.
However, this time all we know is that the magnitude of the angles in the infinites-
imal image triangle are the same as those in the original. If the sense of the angles
also agree, then the image is obtained by amplitwisting the original, just as before.
But if the angles are reversed, then we must flip the original triangle over as well
3 We only mean “same” in the sense that the variations in amplification are of the same infinitesimal
order as the dimensions of abc. If the amplifications were precisely the same, then extending our
argument to a whole network of closely spaced vertices, we would conclude that the amplification
was constant throughout the region.
230 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
as amplitwisting it. This “flip” may be accomplished by reflecting in any line; in
particular, we may employ reflection in the real axis, z ÞÑ z. Thus if f(z) is a
mapping that is known to possess an amplification throughout an infinitesimal
neighbourhood of a point p, then either f(z) is analytic at p, or else f(z) is analytic
at p.
It is interesting to note that the use of triangles in the above arguments was not
incidental, but instead crucial. Rectangles, for example, would simply not have
sufficed. Take the first argument. Certainly conformality still guarantees us that
an infinitesimal rectangle maps to another infinitesimal rectangle. However, this
image rectangle could in principle have very different proportions from the orig-
inal, and hence not be obtainable via an amplitwist. Try the second argument for
yourself and see how it too fails.
For a computational approach to the above results, see Ahlfors (1979, p. 73).
4.6.3 Conformality and the Riemann Sphere
In the previous chapter we addressed a twin question: “How are we to visualize
the effect of a mapping on infinitely remote parts of the complex plane, or the effect
of a mapping that hurls finite points into the infinite distance?” Our answer was
to replace both complex planes (original and image) with Riemann spheres. We
could then visualize the mapping as taking place between the two spheres, rather
than between the two planes. To a large extent the success of this merely depended
upon the fact that we had gathered up the infinite reaches of the plane to a single
point on the sphere. It did not depend on the precise manner in which we chose
to do this. Why then the insistence on accomplishing this with stereographic pro-
jection, rather than in some other way? Several reasons emerged in the previous
chapter, but the present discussion shows that another compelling reason is that
stereographic projection is conformal.
Only now can we fully appreciate this point, for we have seen that analytic
functions are the conformal mappings of the plane. As illustrated in [4.16], the con-
formality of stereographic projection now enables us to translate this directly into
a statement about Riemann spheres:
A mapping between spheres represents an analytic function if and only if
it is conformal.
We have drawn the spheres separate from the planes to reinforce the idea that
we are entitled to let the plane fade from our minds, and to adopt instead the
sphere as a logically independent base of operations. Indeed, at this stage we could
consider complex analysis to be nothing more than the study of conformal maps
between spheres. But in works on Riemann surfaces it is shown that in order to
embrace the global aspects of many-one functions and their inverses, one must
extend this conception to conformal mappings between more general surfaces,
such as doughnuts.
Critical Points 231
[4.16] Analytic mappings of induce conformal mappings of the Riemann sphere, for
the simple reason that stereographic projection is conformal.
4.7 Critical Points
4.7.1 Degrees of Crushing
We return to the mapping z2 and note that at z= 0, (z2)′
= 2z= 0. A place such as
this, where the derivative vanishes, is called a critical point. Recall that in the previ-
ous chapter we defined the term “critical point” differently, as a point at which the
conformality of an otherwise conformal mapping breaks down. These two defini-
tions are not at odds with one another. If the derivative f′(z) of an analytic mapping
fis not zero at z= p, then we know that fis conformal at p, so conformality can
only break down at points where f′(z) = 0. Although it is not obvious, later we
will be able to prove the converse fact that if f′(p) = 0 then fcannot be conformal
at p. Thus the two definitions are equivalent.
In terms of the amplitwist concept a critical point could equally well be defined
as a point of zero amplification. This suggests that the effect of an analytic mapping
on an infinitesimal disc centred at a critical point is to “crush it down to a single
image point”. The statement in quotes is not to be taken literally, rather it is to be
understood in the following sense.
Imagine that the disc (radius ϵ) is so tiny that it must be placed under a micro-
scope in order to be seen. Suppose that we have available a whole family of lenses
of increasing power with which to view it: L0, L1, L2, L3, . . .. For example, L0 has
magnification 1/ϵ0 = 1, so that it’s really no better than using the naked eye. On
the other hand L1 has magnification 1/ϵ1, and it is thus so powerful that we can
232 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
actually see the disc with it. The lens L2 is even more remarkable in that it magni-
fies by 1/ϵ2, so that even a small part of our microscopic disc now completely fills
the viewing screen4
.
Let’s switch back to L1 so that we can see the whole disc again, and watch what
happens to it when we apply the transformation zÞÑ z2. It disappears! At best we
might see a single dot sitting at the image of the critical point. It is in this sense that
the mapping is crushing. However, if we now attach L2 instead, we can see our
mistake: the dot isn’t a dot, in fact it’s another disc of radius ϵ2
.
For this particular mapping, L2 was sufficient to see that the disc had not been
completely crushed. However, at a critical point of another mapping, even this
might not provide sufficient magnification, and we would require a stronger lens,
say Lm, to reveal that the image of the disc isn’t just a point. The integer mmeasures
the degree of crushing at the critical point.
4.7.2 Breakdown of Conformality
In addition to being locally crushing, we have stated (but not yet proved) that the
conformality of an analytic function breaks down at its critical points. We can see
this in our example. When the z2 mapping acts on a pair of rays through the crit-
ical point z = 0, it fails to preserve the angle between them; in fact it doubles it.
Thus, just at the critical point, the conformality of z2 breaks down. This is a gen-
eral property. In fact we will show later that the behaviour of a mapping very near
to a critical point is essentially given by zm
, m⩾2. Rather than being conserved,
angles at the critical point z = 0 are consequently multiplied by m. We quantify
the degree5 of this strange behaviour by saying that z= 0 is a critical point of order
(m− 1). Notice that this mis the same one as in the previous paragraph: in order
to see the image we have to use the Lmlens.
Despite the fact that conformality breaks down at critical points, we shall con-
tinue to make such bald statements as, “z2 is conformal”. The tacit assumption
is that critical points are being excluded. Indeed we were making this assump-
tion throughout the previous section, for we only concerned ourselves there with
typical points. Later we will see that critical points are, in a mathematically pre-
cise sense, “few and far between”, and this is our excuse for the scant attention
we are presently paying them. Nevertheless, we may safely skirt around this issue
4 In terms of this analogy we could say that most of the diagrams in this chapter, indeed in the rest of
the book, show views of the image complex plane taken through L1. For example [4.10] depicts a tiny
circle being amplitwisted to produce another circle. However, if we viewed part of this image ‘circle’
with L2 instead of L1, then deviations from circularity would become visible. Of course the smaller
we make the preimage circle, the smaller these deviations will be.
5 The reason we define it to be (m− 1), rather than m, is that this properly reflects the multiplicity
of the root of the derivative.
Critical Points 233
only so long as we focus on the effect of the function on separate chunks of its
domain. When one studies Riemann surfaces, one tries to fit all this partial infor-
mation into a global picture of the mapping, and in achieving this the critical points
will play a crucial role. They do so by virtue of yet another aspect of the peculiar
behaviour of a mapping in the vicinity of such points, and it is to this feature that we
now turn.
In the previous chapter we discussed the possibility of critical points being
located at infinity. In particular, we considered z ÞÑ zm. On the Riemann sphere
we drew two straight lines passing through the origin, and we thereby saw that
angles at both z= 0 and z= ∞ were multiplied by m. We therefore conclude that
∞ is a critical point of zm of order (m− 1), just like the origin. Actually, except
for m = 2, we don’t yet know if zm is conformal anywhere! However, in the next
chapter we will see that it is conformal everywhere except at the two critical points
we have just discussed.
4.7.3 Branch Points
First consider the case of a real function R(x) from R to R. In solving problems
on maxima and minima, we learn from an early age the importance of finding the
places where R′(x) = 0. Figure [4.17] shows an ordinary graph of y= R(x), empha-
sizing a different aspect of the behaviour of Rnear to a “critical point” cwhere
R′(c) = 0. Above a typical point t, for which R′(t) ̸= 0, the graph is either going up
or going down, so the function is locally one-to-one. However, near cit is clearly
two-to-one.
An analogous significance holds for complex mappings. Typically f′(z) ̸= 0, and
so an infinitesimal neighbourhood of zis amplitwisted to an infinitesimal image
neighbourhood of w= f(z), and the two neighbourhoods are clearly in one-to-one
correspondence. However, if f′(z0) = 0 then (according to our earlier claim) near
to z0 the function behaves like zm, with m⩾2. Thus, if a point is in a close orbit
around z0, its image will orbit w0 at m-times the angular speed, and corresponding
to each point near w0 there will be mpreimages near z0. Thus w0 is a branch point
of order (m− 1). We conclude that a critical point of a given order maps to a branch
point of the same order.
We began this idea by using an analogy with real functions, but we should also
note an important difference. A real function R(x) is necessarily one-to-one when
R′(x) ̸= 0, but (unlike the complex case) it need not be many-to-one when R′(x) = 0.
The graph of x3, for example, is flat at the origin and yet it is still one-to-one in an
infinitesimal neighbourhood of that point. In contrast to this, the complex mapping
zÞÑ z3 is three-to-one near the origin, due to the existence of complex cube roots.
234 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
[4.17] Breakdown of one-to-oneness near critical points. When R′(x) ̸= 0 (as at x= t)
the graph is either going up or down, so the function is one-to-one in the immediate
vicinity of the point. But near a “critical point” x= c, defined by R′(c) = 0, we see that
Rneed not be one-to-one. The same turns out to be true for complex analytic mappings,
only more so: if f′(c) = 0, then fis necessarily not one-to-one in the immediate vicinity
of z= c.
4.8 The Cauchy–Riemann Equations
4.8.1 Introduction
To end this chapter we will try to gain a better perspective on where the analytic
functions lie within the hierarchy of mappings of the plane. A benefit of this will be
the discovery of another way (the third!) of characterizing analytic functions, this
time in terms of their real and imaginary parts.
The first thing to do is realize that the “general” mappings (x, y)ÞÑ (u, v) that
we considered earlier were not really as general as they could have been. Picture
part of the plane as being a rolled out piece of pastry on a table. A general mapping
corresponds to “doing something” to the pastry, thereby moving its points to new
locations (the images) on the table. For example, we might cut the pastry in half
and move the two pieces away from each other. This is much more general than
anything we contemplated earlier, for it does not even possess the rudimentary
quality of continuity. That is, if two points are on either side of the cut, then no
matter how close we move them together, their images will remain far apart.
Even if we do insist on continuity, the resulting mappings are still more general
than those we have considered. For example, imagine pressing down the rolling-
pin somewhere in the middle of the pastry, and, in a single roll, stretching the far
side to twice its former size. This certainly is continuous, for bringing two points
together always brings their images together. The problem now lies in the fact that
if two infinitesimal, diametrically opposed arrows emanate from a point beneath
The Cauchy–Riemann Equations 235
the starting position of the pin, then they each undergo a quite different transfor-
mation. Thus, in an obvious sense (not a subtle complex-differentiation sense) the
mapping isn’t differentiable at this point. Nevertheless, provided we stay away
from this line, the mapping is differentiable in the real sense, and hence subject to
our earlier analysis using the Jacobian matrix.
Another interesting kind of mapping arises from the commonplace operation of
folding the pastry. Suppose we fold it like a letter being placed in an envelope [two
creases]. Three different points will end up above a single point of the table, and
the mapping is thus three-to-one. However, at the creases themselves the mapping
is only one-to-one, and furthermore, differentiability also breaks down there. Nev-
ertheless, provided that we only look at the fold-free portions of the pastry, such
many-one functions are still subject to our previous analysis.
Suppose we play with the pastry in an ordinary way, rolling it (not necessarily
evenly) now in this direction, now in another, then turning it, folding it, rolling
it again, and so forth; then, provided we suitably restrict the domain, we can
still apply our old analysis. While such a mapping is indeed very general, we
hope that this discussion has revealed that (being continuous and differentiable
in the real sense) it is, in fact, already quite high up the evolutionary ladder. It
will therefore not come as such a surprise to learn that the local geometric effect
of such a mapping is remarkably simple, though naturally not as simple as an
amplitwist.
4.8.2 The Geometry of Linear Transformations
We pick up our earlier investigation where we left it. The local effect of the mapping
is to perform the linear transformation encoded in the Jacobian matrix (4.2). If we
can first understand the effect of a uniform linear transformation—corresponding
to a constant matrix—then we shall be finished. For we need only then remember
that our analysis is only applicable locally, the actual linear transformation varying
as it does from one place to the next.
Consider the effect of a uniform linear transformation on a circle C. Since the
Cartesian equation of Cis quadratic, the linear change of coordinates induced by
the transformation will lead to another quadratic equation for the image curve.
The image curve Eis thus a conic section, and since the finite points of Care not
sent to infinity, this conic must be an ellipse. See [4.18], and compare this also with
[4.9], where the local consequence of this result was illustrated for a non-uniform
transformation acting on an infinitesimal circle.
We have just used an algebraic statement of linearity. The fundamental geometric
fact is that it makes no difference if we add two vectors and then map the result,
or if we map the vectors first and then add them. Convince yourself of these two
simple consequences:
236 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
[4.18] Singular Value Decomposition. A linear transformation maps the circle Cto the
ellipse E. Let dbe the diameter of Cthat is mapped to the major axis D. Consider the
chords of C[dashed] that are perpendicular to d. Since these are all bisected by d, their
images must be a family of parallel chords of Esuch that Dis their common bisector.
They must therefore be the family perpendicular to D. We thereby deduce the Singular
Value Decomposition: A linear transformation is a stretch in the direction of d, another
stretch perpendicular to it, and finally a twist.
• Parallel lines map to parallel lines.
• The midpoint of a line-segment maps to the midpoint of the image line-segment.
We now apply these facts to E.
Since all the diameters of Care bisected by the centre of C, it follows that the
image chords of Emust all pass through a common point of bisection. Thus the
centre of Cis mapped to the centre of E. Drawn in the same heavy line as its image
is the particular diameter dof the circle that is mapped to the major axis Dof the
ellipse. Now consider the chords of C[dashed] that are perpendicular to d. Since
these are all bisected by d, their images must be a family of parallel chords of Esuch
that Dis their common bisector. They must therefore be the family perpendicular
to D. All this is summarized in [4.18].
Thus we have obtained the following result:
Local Singular Value Decomposition. The local linear transforma-
tion induced by a (non-linear) complex mapping is a stretch in the
(4.5)
direction of d, another stretch perpendicular to it, and finally a twist.
This result also makes sense at the level of counting degrees of freedom. Just as
the matrix has four independent entries, so the specification of our transformation
also requires four bits of information: the direction of d, the stretch factor in this
direction, the perpendicular stretch factor, and the twist.
The Cauchy–Riemann Equations 237
[REMARKS: This Singular Value Decomposition (SVD for short) is of enormous
importance in Linear Algebra and its real-world applications. It was discovered
by Eugenio Beltrami,6 whom we shall meet again in Chapter 6, because he also
made pivotal discoveries in Hyperbolic Geometry. In the context of the standard
SVD theorem, the two orthogonal expansion factors are called the singular values
of the transformation. In VDGF7 we elaborate on these ideas, and use them to pro-
vide a simple geometrical interpretation of the transpose of a matrix, which we have not
found in any standard Linear Algebra textbook. This in turn can be used to provide
geometrical explanations of other standard results in Linear Algebra.]
The ultimate specialization to analytic functions now simply requires that the
two stretch factors be put equal. This apparently reduces the number of degrees
of freedom from four to three. However, since we are now producing an equal
expansion in all directions, the direction chosen for dbecomes irrelevant, and we
are left with only two genuine degrees of freedom: the amplification and the twist.
Note that we now have the following:
An orientation preserving mapping is conformal if and only if it sends
infinitesimal circles to infinitesimal circles.
If a mapping preserves circles in general, then, in particular, it must send infinites-
imal circles to infinitesimal circles, and hence it must be conformal8. Bypassing
the detailed investigation of the previous chapter, we now see that the confor-
mality/analyticity of Möbius transformations follows from the mere fact that they
preserve circles.
4.8.3 The Cauchy–Riemann Equations
We obtain another characterization of analytic functions if we now ask how we may
recognize a Jacobian matrix for which both expansion factors are equal. This is most
easily answered by considering what kind of matrix corresponds to multiplication
by a complex number, for we already know that this produces the desired type of
linear transformation. Multiplying z= (x+ iy) by (a+ ib), we get
(x+ iy)ÞÑ (a+ ib) (x+ iy) = (ax− by) + i(bx+ ay).
This corresponds to the multiplication of a vector in R2 by the matrix
a−b
b a. (4.6)
6 See Stewart (1993).
7 See Needham (2021, §15.4).
8 For a different proof of this fact, see Sommerville (1958, p. 237).
238 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
Compare this with the Jacobian matrix (4.2),
J=
Bxu Byu
Bxv Byv.
In order for the effect of Jto reduce to an amplitwist, it must have the same form
as (4.6), and thus
Bxu = +Byv,
(4.7)
Bxv = −Byu.
These are the celebrated Cauchy–Riemann equations. They provide us with a
third way of recognizing an analytic function. However, as with the underlying
amplitwist concept, these equations must be satisfied throughout an infinitesimal
neighbourhood of a point in order that the mapping be analytic there [see Ex. 12].
Since (a+ ib) is playing the role of the amplitwist, comparison of (4.6) and (4.2)
now yields two formulae for the derivative:
f′
= Bxu+ iBxv= Bxf, (4.8)
and
f′
= Byv− iByu= −iByf. (4.9)
By way of example, consider z ÞÑ z3. Multiplying this out we obtain a rather
haphazard looking mess:
u+ iv= (x3
− 3xy2) + i(3x2y− y3).
However, differentiating the real and imaginary parts, we obtain
Bxu = 3x2
− 3y2 = +Byv,
Bxv = 6xy= −Byu,
and so the Cauchy–Riemann equations are satisfied. Thus, far from being haphaz-
ard, the special forms of uand vhave ensured that the mapping is analytic. Using
(4.8) we can calculate the amplitwist:
(z3)′
= 3(x2
− y2) + i6xy= 3z2
,
just as in ordinary calculus. Check that (4.9) gives the same answer.
In the next chapter we will sever our umbilical cord to R2 and discover how the
above results can be better understood by directly appealing to the geometry of the
complex plane.
Exercises 239
4.9 Exercises
1 Use the Cauchy–Riemann equations to verify that zÞÑ zis not analytic.
2 The mapping z ÞÑ z3 acts on an infinitesimal shape and the image is exam-
ined. It is found that the shape has been rotated by π, and its linear dimensions
expanded by 12. Where was the shape originally located? [There are two
possibilities.]
3 Consider zÞÑ Ω(z) = z2/z. By writing zin polar form, find out the geometric
effect of Ω. Using two colours, draw two very small arrows of equal length
emanating from a typical point z: one parallel to z; the other perpendicular to
z. Draw their images emanating from Ω(z). Deduce that Ωfails to produce an
amplitwist. [Your picture should show this in two ways.]
4 The picture shows the shaded interior of a curve being mapped by an analytic
function to the exterior of the image curve. If ztravels round the curve counter-
clockwise, then which way does its image wtravel round the image curve?
[Hint: Draw some infinitesimal arrows emanating from z, including one in the
direction of motion.]
5 Consider f(x+ iy) = (x2 + y2) + i(y/x). Find and sketch the curves that are
mapped by finto (a) horizontal lines, and (b) vertical lines. Notice from your
answers that fappears to be conformal. Show that it is not in two ways: (i) by
explicitly finding some curves whose angle of intersection isn’t preserved; and
(ii) by using the Cauchy–Riemann equations.
6 Continuing from the previous exercise, show that no choice of v can make
f(x+ iy) = (x2 + y2) + ivanalytic.
7 (i) (ii) If g(z) = 3 + 2ithen explain geometrically why g′(z) ≡ 0.
Show that if the amplification of an analytic function is identically zero (i.e.,
f′(z) ≡ 0) on some connected region, then the function is constant there.
240 Differentiation: The Amplitwist Concept
(iii) Give a simple counterexample to show that this conclusion does not follow
if the region is instead made up of disconnected components.
8 Use pictures to explain why if f(z) is analytic on some connected region, each of
the following conditions forces it to reduce to a constant.
(i) Ref(z) = 0
(ii) |f(z)|= const.
(iii) Not only is f(z) analytic, but f(z) is too.
9 Use the Cauchy–Riemann equations to give rigorous computational proofs of
the results of the previous two exercises.
10 Instead of writing a mapping in terms of its real and imaginary parts (i.e. f=
u+ iv), it is sometimes more convenient to write it in terms of length and angle:
f(z) = ReiΨ
,
where Rand Ψare functions of z. Show that the equations that characterize an
analytic fare now
BxR= RByΨ and ByR= −RBxΨ.
11 Let’s agree to say that “f= u+ ivsatisfies the Cauchy–Riemann equations”
if u and v do. Show that if f(z) and g(z) both satisfy the Cauchy–Riemann
equations, then their sum and their product do also.
12 For nonzero z, let f(z) = f(x+ iy) = xy/z.
(i) Show that f(z) approaches 0 as z approaches any point on the real or
imaginary axis, including the origin.
(ii) Having established that f= 0 on both axes, deduce that the Cauchy–
Riemann equations are satisfied at the origin.
(iii) Despite this, show that fis not even differentiable at 0, let alone analytic
there! To do so, find the image of an infinitesimal arrow emanating from
0 and pointing in the direction eiϕ. Deduce that while fdoes have a twist
at 0, it fails to have an amplification there